*This book is for sale in India only and cannot be exported.

Girish Chandra Gosh - A Bohemian devotee of Sri Ramakrishna

Girish Chandra Ghosh (1844-1912) was the father of Bengali theatre, Calcutta's own Goethe, as brilliant and prolific as Shakespeare. A massively successful playwright, composer, actor and director, eventually single-handedly created the modern performing arts in northeastern India. But that's just a small part of the story.
On 21 September 1884, a priest from the nearby Kali temple arrived at Girish?s Star Theatre to watch his play, Chaitanya Lila. It was Sri's Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, one of the greatest saints of the 19th century. The meeting of these two giants would prove portentous. At the feet of the spiritual master, Girish would claim his most celebrated role, as Ramakrishna?s beloved and exuberantly unconventional devotee.
?I am a sinner?, Girish told Ramakrishna frankly when the two met; he was a drunkard and a debauchee, but never a hypocrite; their remarkable relationship is a classic story of redemption, as Ramakrishna's unconditional acceptance and gentle guidance transformed Girish from a committed atheist into a passionate lover of God.
Girish Ghosh?s genius was rooted in his pervasive experience of death. He lost his parents early in life, and at various times most of the siblings, both his wives, and even some of his young children. Unrelenting tragedy drove the famous writer to alcoholism, but also gave death and power to his enormous body of work. Ramakrishna helped Girish see beyond his personal tragedies into the beauty and subtle purpose of the Divine Mother's will.
Few of Swami Vivekananda's Western admirers realize however, that Ramakrishna was and remains even today the patron saint of the stage in his native Bengal, a testament to his enduring impact on Girish Ghosh and artists and actors of India.
This book provides a fascinating introduction to Ramakrishna?s most colourful and least orthodox devotee. Details of numerous encounters between master and disciple have been preserved; we actually see Ramakrishna teaching and reshaping this difficult student. Chetanananda also describes Girish Ghosh?s contributions to the development of modern Bengali theatre and summarize some of his most influential plays, revealing Ramakrishna?s direct influence. The sparkling arts and vibrant spirituality of 19th century Calcutta?at the time a cultural centre of British India?comes to life in this vivid portrait of that magical era.
Book Review:
Girish Chandra Ghosh (1844-1912) was the father of Bengali theatre. A massively successful playwright, composer, actor and director, he virtually single-handedly created the modern performing arts in northeastern India. But that's just a small part of his story.
In this new book of his, Swami Chetanananda has exhaustively documented the life of Girish Chandra Ghosh for the English-speaking world.

