

The Universal Significance of Sri Ramakrishna?s Avatarahood and Message
According to Swami Vivekananda, ?With the birth of Sri Ramakrishna the Golden Age has begun.? But today, such an assertion may appear preposterous, with no sign of such a beginning visible. Who was Sri Ramakrishna? What was the purpose of his advent? Did he bring about a silent revolution, unseen on the surface? This book skilfully deals with these issues, taking for its subject the Avatarahood of Sri Ramakrishna and its universal significance. In the course of his discussion the author presents the different facets of an Avatara and the universal relevance of his message.
Book Review:
A holy lamp burnt bright in the Kali temple at Dakshineshwar. It chased away shadows like lust, anger and jealousy in the minds of people who came there to worship. The glow united the young and the old in an endeavour to come face to face with God. A few years later, a spark from this lamp went to America and raised the light high and began to hunt the evils in mankind like communalism, casteism and the pride of wealth. Slowly but surely, this holy lamp is seeking to unite the human family with the golden ties of friendship, devotion, knowledge and self-sacrifice.
The holy lamp was Sri Ramakrishna. Swami Bhajanananda, who has an uncanny way of divining the questions that rise in us as we struggle with the exigencies of earthly existence, has sought to answer some of them with his well-known clarity of perception. The major question: Who is Sri Ramakrishna? Swami Bhajanananda modifies an Aurobindonian pronouncement regarding Brahman to assure us that ?the real Sri Ramakrishna is unknown but not unknowable.? He is the New Man, the avatar who has inaugurated a new Satya Yuga, as Swami Vivekananda assured us. He did not jettison the past but gave a new orientation to the received tradition. He was a bhakta who was often self-lost in God-consciousness. At the same time, he refused to be a frog in the well. He sought to know the ?other? side. Not for himself did he go through the religious experiences of Islam or Christianity but to show us the way to understand the basic unity of all faiths. As for himself, like Rama, he thought of himself as a human being and loved to be one among his disciples and friends. Aatmaanam maanusham manye!
According to Swami Bhajanananda, the most valuable gift of Sri Ramakrishna to humanity is his separating religion from spirituality. Religious customs and rituals often give rise to conflicts, due to ignorance.
?Sri Ramakrishna held that spirituality forms the core or most essential aspect of all religions. When he said that all religions lead to the same goal, what he meant was that the spiritual paths of all religions lead to the same ultimate goal. The separation of the essential spiritual aspects of religions from their outer forms that Sri Ramakrishna brought about has now become a widely accepted view. More and more people, especially in the West, now regard themselves as spiritual rather than as religious.?
From Swami Bhajanananda?s closely argued text, we realize that the spiritual renaissance initiated by Sri Ramakrishna is now verily like the holy tree Yggdrasill which we come across in Norse mythology. Like our Aswatha, the tree has innumerable healthy branches and its three roots are said to extend to three life-giving water sources in the heavens. While the Triveni of Sri Ramakrishna, Sarada Devi and Swami Vivekananda continues to pour blessings on this global Ramakrishna Movement, the branches as Institutions engage themselves in study, education, social work, publications and such activities, proving that all life is yoga. The Near and the Far come under the universal outlook of the Order:
?Sri Ramakrishna represents the universal Prototype of divinity on earth, and he can be identified with the Impersonal (nirguna) aspect or with any of the different Personal (saguna) aspects of the ultimate Reality.?
Love, service, harmony. Such are the key words in the Ramakrishna Movement, so well orchestrated by the innumerable organizations that have been inspired by it. A very welcome addition to Ramakrishna-Vivekananda literature, The Light of the Modern World has a delightful get-up and a meaningful cover with the image of Sri Ramakrishna in Samadhi?ecstasy.
Such periodical publications reiterating the message of the Movement are necessary, like trimming the wick of a lamp now and then, to keep the glow steady and bright. So we have here a reminder, a beautiful tribute to the nutan manush on his 175th birth anniversary.