

This book reveals the poetic genius of Swami Vivekananda.

Book Review:


The stars are blotted out,
The clouds are covering clouds,
It is darkness vibrant, sonant
In the roaring wind? [Kali the Mother]
?The cloud puts forth its deluge strength
When light cleaves its breast? [The Song of the Free]
?I look before and after
And find that all is right,
In my deepest sorrows
There is a soul of light? [Light]
?The lakes are opening up wide in love,
Their hundred thousand lotus eyes
To welcome thee ? Thou Lord of Light? [To the Fourth of July]

All the above lines from Swami Vivekananda?s poems are packed with lyrical intensity in the same measure as the spiritual urge and echo some of the well-known lines in English poetry.

All great mystics have been great poets. Swamiji says in his ?Memoirs of European Travels? that every good poet is a Vedantin e.g. Goethe, Schiller and Lamartine. The beauty in nature is only
the partial expression of the real all-embracing divine beauty. His poetry is the symbolic and lyrical expression of the innate beauty of the individual and the Divine Self. Swamiji?s poems have been analysed by Radhika Nagarath more from the philosophic
standpoint than from the poetic angle. Writing on the poem The Song of the Free, the author says that Swamiji explains the concept of immortality through mathematical reasoning that the sum total of energy that is displayed in the universe is the same throughout. She sees in the poem The Cup, the philosophy of suffering. In the chapter on ?Advaitism and Classical Poetry?, the author draws a parallel among Byron, Shelley and Vivekananda as monists. In the same breath, the author compares
Addison, a representative of the Age of Reason, with Vivekananda from the point of view of monism, which is rather intriguing. In some places, the arguments are rambling and digressive. The author?s dedication and scholarship, however, is
evident throughout the book and cannot be questioned.

The claim that this approach towards analyzing Swamiji?s poems is the first-ever one in the world is incorrect. The reviewer had read an article in the Prabuddha Bharata years ago by Carebanu Cooper on Swamiji?s poetry. In the Vedanta Kesari also, there were enlightening articles on the subject. An M.Phil. degree was awarded by the University of Madras for a dissertation on the above subject.

The author has taken pains to consult numerous books. The wrapper design is attractive with Swamiji within a halo with the Himalayas above and the ocean below. Was not Swamiji as
broad as the sky and as deep as the ocean?

Of course there are mistakes in printing which must be carefully looked into in the next edition

